---
layout: note
title: "Cauchy Sequences and Convergence"
toc: true
mathjax: true
note: 5
date: 2020-02-06
---

## Cauchy Sequences and Convergence
Recall: For a bounded sequence $$(a_n)$$:
> - \$$I_N = \inf\{a_n, n>N\}$$ 
> - \$$S_N = \sup\{a_n, n>N\}$$ 
> - \$$I_1 \leq I_2 \leq ... \leq \liminf a_n \leq \limsup a_n \leq ... \leq S_2 \leq S_1$$
{:.proof}

**Def**: $$(a_n)$$ is Cauchy if for all $$\epsilon > 0$$ we can find an such that $$\vert a_n - a_m \vert < \epsilon$$, for all $$n,m > N$$

**Thm**: A convergent sequence $$(a_n)$$ implies that $$(a_n)$$ is Cauchy

**Proof**: $$\forall \epsilon > 0$$ s.t. $$\vert a_n - a_m \vert < \epsilon \forall n,m > N$$
$$\implies a_n < a_m + \epsilon \forall n,m > N$$

> For any $$n>N$$, we have
> - \$$ a_n < a_m + \epsilon\ \forall m > N$$
> - \$$\implies a_n \leq \inf\{a_m: m > N\} + \epsilon$$
> 
> So we have, for any $$n > N$$,
> - \$$a_n \leq I_N + \epsilon$$
> - \$$\implies \sup\{a_n: n > N\} \leq I_N + \epsilon$$
> - \$$\limsup_{n \to \infty} a_n \leq S_N \leq I_N + \epsilon \leq \liminf_{n \to \infty} a_n+ \epsilon$$
> - \$$\implies \limsup a_n \leq \liminf a_n + \epsilon \forall \epsilon > 0$$
> - $$\implies \limsup a_n \leq \liminf a_n$$, since we always have $$\liminf a_n \leq \limsup a_n < n$$
{:.proof}

We proved that bounded and $$\liminf = \limsup$$ implies convergence, and convergence implies Cauchy, so now we will prove Cauchy implies $$\liminf = \limsup$$.
{:.proof}

---

## Cauchy Implies Infimum = Supremum

**Def**: A subsequence of a sequence $$(a_n)$$ is a sequence $$(a_{k_n}) = (a_{k_1}, a_{k_2}, ...)$$ where $$1 \leq k_1 < k_2 < ... < a_m$$ are positive integers, e.g.
- \$$(a_{2n}) = (a_2, a_4, a_6, ...)$$
- \$$(a_{2n-1}) = (a_1, a_3, a_5, ...)$$

In homework, we proved that $$\lim_{n \to \infty} a_n = 0 \implies \lim_{n \to \infty} a_{2n} = a = \lim_{n \to \infty} a_{2n-1}$$

---
{:.hr-subsection}

### Subsequences Approach Sequence Limit

**Question**: Suppose $$\lim_{n \to \infty} a_n = a$$, is it true that $$\lim_{n \to \infty} a_{k_n} = a$$ for any subsequence $$(a_{k_n})$$?

> Yes: $$\forall \epsilon > 0, \exists N > 0$$ s.t. $$\vert a_n - a \vert < \epsilon \forall n > N$$ 
> 
> The intuition is that there exists a $$k_n$$ that is greater than $$N$$, at which point the bounds will hold true.
> 
> And our sequence is $$a_{k_1}, ...$$, which contains strictly increasing $$k_n$$, so $$\exists M > 0$$ such that $$k_M > N$$. Then, for any $$n > M$$, we know $$ \vert a_{k_n} - a \vert < \epsilon$$ since $$k_n > k_M > N$$.
> 
> The converse is not true. Consider $$(0, 1, 0, 1, ...)$$. The odd terms converge to $$0$$, but the even terms to $$1$$. Note that $$\liminf a_n = 0$$ and $$\limsup a_n = 1$$. We will prove that for any bounded sequence, there exists a subsequence that converges to $$\liminf$$ and one that converges to $$\limsup$$.
{:.proof}

**Another question**: If $$\lim a_{2n} = a = \lim a_{2n - 1}$$, does this imply that $$\lim a_n = a$$? It turns out the answer is *yes*, and the proof is left as an exercise.

---

## Bolzano Weierstrass
**Definition**: Any bounded sequence has a convergent subsequence

> It suffices to prove any bounded sequence has a monotone subsequence. If we can bound this monotone subsequence, it will be *monotone and bounded*, hence convergent.
{:.proof}

**Lemma**: Any bounded subsequence has a monotone subsequence.

**Proof**:

> Definition: Given a bounded sequence $$(a_n)$$, we say $$a_n$$ is **big** if it is bigger than all the terms after it, i.e. $$a_n > a_m \forall n < m $$.
> 
> For any bounded sequence $$(a_n)$$,
> 1. It has infinitely many big terms, or
> 1. It has finitely many big terms.
> 
> In the first case, the sequence has infinitely many big terms, so we can just take all the big terms: $$\{ a_{k_1}, a_{k_2}, ...\}$$, the sequence of big terms from $$(a_n)$$. This gives a subsequence of $$(a_n)$$, a strictly decreasing subsequence (since each term is strictly greater than the term after).
> 
> In the second case, the sequence has finitely many big terms, so we take $$N = \max\{k_1, ... k_n\}$$. Consider only $$a_n$$ for $$n>N$$. These $$a_n$$ are not big for all of these $$n$$s.  
> Now we define $$a_{k_1} = a_{N+1}$$. Since $$k_1 = N+1 > N$$, $$a_k$$ is not big. This implies that there exists $$k_2 > k_1$$ such that $$a_{k_2} \geq a_{k_1}$$. Since $$k_2 > k_1 > N$$, $$a_{k_2}$$ is not big. Using the same argument, we can construct $$k_3$$, and construct the remaining inductively. This creates a monotonically increasing subsequence.
{:.proof}

---

## Bounded to Limsup and Liminf

**Theorem**: For a bounded sequence, there exists two subsequences that converges to $$\liminf$$ and $$\limsup$$, respectively.

To prove this theorem, first we prove a lemma:

---
{:.hr-subsection}

### Lemma: Subsequence iff Infinite Set Within Neighborhood

**Lemma**: Having a subsequence of a sequence converging to $$a$$ is equivalent to $$\forall \epsilon > 0$$, the set $$\{n \in N: \vert a_n - a \vert < \epsilon\}$$ is infinite.

**Proof**:
> (&rarr;): $$(a_{k_n})$$ converges to $$a$$:
>
> $$\forall \epsilon > 0, \exists N > 0$$ s.t. $$\vert a_{k_n} - a \vert < \epsilon \forall n > N$$
>
> which implies that $$\{k_{N+1}, k_{N+2}, ...\} \subset \{n \in N: \vert a_n - a \vert < \epsilon\}$$
{:.proof}

> (&larr;):  
> Idea: We'll find a subsequence ($$a_{k_1}, a_{k_2}, ...$$) such that the differences are less than 1, $$1/2$$, ... $$1/n$$.
> - We know that $$\{n \in N: \vert a_n - a \vert < 1\}$$ is infinite.
> - We know that $$\{n \in N: \vert a_n - a \vert < 1/2\}$$ is infinite, so $$\exists k_2 > k_1$$ s.t. $$ \vert a_{k_2} - a \vert < 1/2 $$.
> - We know that $$\{n \in N: \vert a_n - a \vert < 1/3\}$$ is infinite, so $$\exists k_3 > k_1$$ s.t. $$ \vert a_{k_3} - a \vert < 1/3 $$.
> - etc.
{:.proof}

---
{:.hr-subsection}

Now back to the original proof:

**Proof**:
> Let $$Z := \limsup_{n\to\infty} a_n = \lim_{N\to\infty} S_N = \limsup_{N\to\infty} \{a_n : n > N\}$$  
> **Want to show**: $$\forall \epsilon > 0$$, the set $$\{n \in N: \vert a_n - z \vert < \epsilon\}$$ is infinite.
{:.proof}

> **Proof by contradiction.** Suppose that $$\{n \in N: \vert a_n - z \vert < \epsilon\}$$ is finite.
> 1. $$\exists N_1 > 0$$ such that $$z - \epsilon < \sup \{a_n: n>N\} = S_{N_1} < z-\epsilon$$. This implies that $$a_n < z + \epsilon$$ for all $$n > N_1$$.
> 2. Having a finite set means that $$\exists N_2 > 0$$ such that $$z - \epsilon < a_n < z + \epsilon$$ is false $$\forall n > N_2$$.
>
> Now let $$ N := \max\{N_1, N_2\}$$. For any $$n > N$$, we have
> 1. \$$a_n < z + \epsilon$$
> 2. $$z - \epsilon < a_n < z + \epsilon$$ is false.
>
> which implies that $$\forall n > N, a_n \leq z - \epsilon$$, which means $$ \sup\{a_n: n > N\} \leq z - \epsilon$$. But recall that $$ \sup\{a_n: n > N\} = S_N = \limsup_{n\to\infty}a_n = z$$, which is a contradiction.
{:.proof}
