---
layout: note
title: "Note 2 - Combinatorial Games"
toc: true
mathjax: true
note: 2
date: 2020-01-24
---

## Combinatorial Games
First, let's take a look at some combinatorial games.

---
{:.hr-subsection}

### Penalty Kicks
- Penalty Kicks is a Zero Sum Game
- Payoff for this problem (numbers indicate probability of scoring):

| Player \ Keeper | L   | R   |
| L               | 0.5 | 1   |
| R               | 1   | 0.8 |

---
{:.hr-subsection}

### Prisoner's Dilemma
- Prisoner's Dilemma is a General Sum Game
- Payoff for this problem (numbers indicate time in jail):

| Prisoner 1 \ Prisoner 2 | Silent   | Confess  |
| Silent                  | (1, 1)   | (-10, 0) |
| Confess                 | (0, -10) | (5, 5)   |

- Nash equilibrium says they will (Confess, Confess)
    - Example of individual rationality.
- (Sidenote: Pareto optimality works for group)

---
{:.hr-subsection}

Requirements to be a combinatorial game: [^partisan-games]
- 2 players
- No ties; there is a winner and game ends
- Taking turns (no simultaneous play)
- Impartial (no differences in moves available to players)
- No randomness
- No hidden information
- Ending Conditions: The game will end in a position where one of the players cannot move. There are two types of endings:
    - The last player to move wins (**Normal Play**).
    - If last player to move loses (**Misère Play**)

The games we will study are called **progressively bounded impartial combinatorial games**, or **PBICG**. The games will have a fixed set of positions $$X$$ and rules that dictate how to get from $$x \in X$$ to $$y \in X$$. If you can go from $$x$$ to $$y$$, then we say that $$y$$ is a follower of $$x$$, and we write $$y \in F(x) \subseteq X$$. Terminal positions in a game are ones that have no followers. In other words, $$f(x) = \emptyset$$. The game ends when one of the players is at a terminal position on their turn.

**Progressively Bounded**: $$\forall x \in X, \exists B(x) < \infty $$ such that the game ends in at most $$B(x)$$ moves. In other words, from any valid start position, there is a bounded set of possible moves that all terminate the game. This can be thought of as a directed graph.
- Ferguson's notation: We start with a graph $$x$$ and a transition function $$F$$. As a directed graph, we have edges where source is $$x$$ and destination is $$y$$, where $$x$$ transitions to $$y$$. $$X$$ represents all nodes (states) of a game, and $$F(x)$$ represents all states that state $$x$$ can transition to.

## Subtraction Game
A take-away game.

This game is defined by $$S=\{1,2,3\}$$. Start with $$n$$ chips. On your turn, you take away 1, 2, or 3 chips.

Take the example of 3 chips. This is an example of an **end position** since the game can be ended in one move.

Take the example of 4 chips. It doesn't matter what the player does, since the game is unwinnable.[^perfect-play] In other words, the previous player can guarantee a win.

## Homework
- Write down what happens in the above subtraction game when $$n=1, 2, ... ,10$$. Try to find a pattern. Label every situation.

---
{:.hr-subsection}

[^partisan-games]: We will not be studying partisan games. A good book to read about other kinds of games is **Winning Ways for your Mathematical Plays**, by Berlekamp.

[^perfect-play]: We assume no human error.
