---
layout: note
title: "Note 6 - Social Choice"
toc: true
mathjax: true
date: 2020-01-31
note: 5
---

## Main Question
How do we aggregate the preferences of individuals in a society?
Two options: majority rule.
If more than two options, might have inconsistent results, assuming voters are rational.

---

## Study of Voting Mechanisms
Borda was dissatisfied with the voting mechanism in place (plurality[^plurality]), so he proposed a system, Borda Count, that Condorcet demonstrated could result in the election of a candidate who was undesirable to the majority of the voters.

**Borda Count**: Suppose there are $$N$$ different choices. The 1st choice gets $$N$$ points, the 2nd gets $$N-1$$ points, and the $$i$$th person gets $$N-i$$ points.

---
{:.hr-subsection}

### Example
- 40 chose A, C, B
- 35 chose B, A, C
- 25 chose C, B, A

Tallying this up, we get:
- A: 215
- B: 195
- C: 190

It seems that society prefers A to B to C. Pairwise, however, B is preferred to A, A is preferred to C, and C is preferred to B. It appears that *transitivity doesn't hold*!

This is called the **Condorcet Paradox**.

---

## Preference relations
- Let $$A = \{1, 2, 3, ... , m\}, 2 < m$$, be a finite set of candidates.
- For each vote $$i$$, we can specify a **preference** for $$i$$: a relationship that, for any pair $$a,b \in A$$, specifies which candidate is preferred by voter $$i$$, denoted by $$\succ_i$$
- $$a \succ_i b$$ indicates that $$a$$ is preferred to $$b$$, with no ties allwoed.
- Assume that the preference relation is **transitive** and **complete** (specified for every pair of candidates)
- Suppose a society consists of $$n$$ individuals, each with a *transitive* preference over the set of candidates $$A$$.
- A **preference profile** $$\pi$$ is an $$n$$-tuple of preferences $$(\succ_1, \succ_2, ...)$$.
- A **voting rule** ($$f$$) assigns a unique winner frm $$A$$, given a preference profile $$m$$.
- A ranking rule ($$R$$), given $$\pi$$, assigns a **social ranking** to the members of $$A$$. This is a complete and transitive preference relation for the society, denoted $$\triangleright$$.

We can see that ranking rule -> voting rule. We can see voting rule -> ranking rule.
Does every ranking rule have a voting rule that would give it?

## Properties of Ranking Rules
- Fair ranking rule
- Transitivity
(more, list is incomplete)

---

## Footnotes
[^plurality]: [Wikipedia](https://www.wikiwand.com/en/Plurality_(voting))
